13. Extending your network.md, before:

# Extending your network

## Introduction to Port Forwarding
* An essential component in connecting applications and services to the Internet. 
* Without port forwarding, applications and services such as web servers are only available to devices within the same direct network.(This is known as intranet)
* Port forwarding is configured at the router of a network.

## Firewalls
* A device within a network responsible for determining what traffic is allowed to enter and exit.
* Where the traffic is coming from? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic from a specific network?)
    * Where is the traffic going to? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic destined for a specific network?)
    * What port is the traffic for? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic destined for port 80 only?)
    * What protocol is the traffic using? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic that is UDP, TCP or both?)
 
* How firewalls answer these questions?: Firewalls perform packet inspection to determine the answers to these questions.
* Firewalls come in all shapes and sizes. From dedicated pieces of hardware (often found in large networks like businesses) that can handle a magnitude of data to residential routers (like at your home!) or software such as Snort, firewalls can be categorised into 2 to 5 categories.
* Category 1: Stateful:
  * Uses the entire information from a connection; rather than inspecting an individual packet.
  * This firewall type consumes many resources in comparison to stateless firewalls as the decision making is dynamic. For example, a firewall could allow the first parts of a TCP handshake that would later fail.
* Category 2: Stateless:
  * Static set of rules to determine whether or not individual packets are acceptable or not. For example, a device sending a bad packet will not necessarily mean that the entire device is then blocked.
  *  If a rule is not exactly matched, it is effectively useless.
  *  However, these firewalls are great when receiving large amounts of traffic from a set of hosts (such as a Distributed Denial-of-Service attack)
 
* 
What layers of the OSI model do firewalls operate at?
layer 3, layer 2

## VPN basics
A technology that allows devices on separate networks to communicate securely by creating a dedicated path between each other over the Internet (known as a tunnel).
***
* Devices connected within this tunnel form their own private network.
* Benefits
  * **Allows networks in different geographical locations to be connected**
    * 	For example, a business with multiple offices will find VPNs beneficial, as it means that resources like servers/infrastructure can be accessed from another office.
  * **Offers privacy**
    * VPN technology uses encryption to protect data. This means that it can only be understood between the devices it was being sent from and is destined for, meaning the data isn't vulnerable to sniffing.
    * This encryption is useful in places with public WiFi, where no encryption is provided by the network. You can use a VPN to protect your traffic from being viewed by other people.
   
  * Offers anonymity.	
    * Journalists and activists depend upon VPNs to safely report on global issues in countries where freedom of speech is controlled.
    * Usually, your traffic can be viewed by your ISP and other intermediaries and, therefore, tracked.
    * The level of anonymity a VPN provides is only as much as how other devices on the network respect privacy. For example, a VPN that logs all of your data/history is essentially the same as not using a VPN in this regard.
   
*  VPN technology has improved over the years. Let's explore some existing VPN technologies below:

1. PPP	
  * This technology is used by PPTP (explained below) to allow for authentication and provide encryption of data. VPNs work by using a private key and public certificate (similar to SSH). A private key & certificate must match for you to connect.
  * This technology is not capable of leaving a network by itself (non-routable).

2. PPTP	
  * The Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) is the technology that allows the data from PPP to travel and leave a network. 

  * PPTP is very easy to set up and is supported by most devices. It is, however, weakly encrypted in comparison to alternatives.

3. IPSec	
  * Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) encrypts data using the existing Internet Protocol (IP) framework.
  * IPSec is difficult to set up in comparison to alternatives; however, if successful, it boasts strong encryption and is also supported on many devices.

## LAN Networking Devices
**1. Router**
* It's job = connnect networks and pass data between them.
* Operates at layer3 of the OSI model.
* Often feature an interctive interface(such as a website or a console)that allows an administrator to configure various rules like router forwarding or firewalling.
* Useful when = devices are connected by multiple paths (will choose shortest and most reliable path with a faster medium --> Copper or Fibre)
* Routers are dedicated devices and do not performs the same function as switches.

**2. Switch**
* A dedicated networking device to connect multiple devices.( from 3 to 62 devices using Ethernet cables)
* Operates at both layer 2 and 3 of the OSI model. However, layer 2 switches cannot operate at layer 3.
* Layer 2 switches = Will forward just the frames onto the connected devices using their MAC address.
* Layer 3 switches = Can perform some of the responsibilities of a router. Like, they can send frames to devices (like layer 2 switches) but also can route packets to other devices using IP.
* **VLAN** : Allows specific devices within a neetwork to be virtually split up. This network separation provides security because it means that rules in place determine how specific devices communicate with each other.

 ![image](https://github.com/jaibirsingh/basics-of-networking/assets/20526556/daceb819-651e-437e-a73b-1f8924bf9051)

Commit message:

Update 13. Extending your network.md

13. Extending your network.md, after:

# Extending your network

## Introduction to Port Forwarding
* An essential component in connecting applications and services to the Internet. 
* Without port forwarding, applications and services such as web servers are only available to devices within the same direct network.(This is known as intranet)
* Port forwarding is configured at the router of a network.

## Firewalls
* A device within a network responsible for determining what traffic is allowed to enter and exit.
* Where the traffic is coming from? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic from a specific network?)
    * Where is the traffic going to? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic destined for a specific network?)
    * What port is the traffic for? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic destined for port 80 only?)
    * What protocol is the traffic using? (has the firewall been told to accept/deny traffic that is UDP, TCP or both?)
 
* How firewalls answer these questions?: Firewalls perform packet inspection to determine the answers to these questions.
* Firewalls come in all shapes and sizes. From dedicated pieces of hardware (often found in large networks like businesses) that can handle a magnitude of data to residential routers (like at your home!) or software such as Snort, firewalls can be categorised into 2 to 5 categories.
* Category 1: Stateful:
  * Uses the entire information from a connection; rather than inspecting an individual packet.
  * This firewall type consumes many resources in comparison to stateless firewalls as the decision making is dynamic. For example, a firewall could allow the first parts of a TCP handshake that would later fail.
* Category 2: Stateless:
  * Static set of rules to determine whether or not individual packets are acceptable or not. For example, a device sending a bad packet will not necessarily mean that the entire device is then blocked.
  *  If a rule is not exactly matched, it is effectively useless.
  *  However, these firewalls are great when receiving large amounts of traffic from a set of hosts (such as a Distributed Denial-of-Service attack)
 
* 
What layers of the OSI model do firewalls operate at?
layer 3 = Network layer, layer 4 = Transport layer

## VPN basics
A technology that allows devices on separate networks to communicate securely by creating a dedicated path between each other over the Internet (known as a tunnel).
***
* Devices connected within this tunnel form their own private network.
* Benefits
  * **Allows networks in different geographical locations to be connected**
    * 	For example, a business with multiple offices will find VPNs beneficial, as it means that resources like servers/infrastructure can be accessed from another office.
  * **Offers privacy**
    * VPN technology uses encryption to protect data. This means that it can only be understood between the devices it was being sent from and is destined for, meaning the data isn't vulnerable to sniffing.
    * This encryption is useful in places with public WiFi, where no encryption is provided by the network. You can use a VPN to protect your traffic from being viewed by other people.
   
  * Offers anonymity.	
    * Journalists and activists depend upon VPNs to safely report on global issues in countries where freedom of speech is controlled.
    * Usually, your traffic can be viewed by your ISP and other intermediaries and, therefore, tracked.
    * The level of anonymity a VPN provides is only as much as how other devices on the network respect privacy. For example, a VPN that logs all of your data/history is essentially the same as not using a VPN in this regard.
   
*  VPN technology has improved over the years. Let's explore some existing VPN technologies below:

1. PPP	
  * This technology is used by PPTP (explained below) to allow for authentication and provide encryption of data. VPNs work by using a private key and public certificate (similar to SSH). A private key & certificate must match for you to connect.
  * This technology is not capable of leaving a network by itself (non-routable).

2. PPTP	
  * The Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) is the technology that allows the data from PPP to travel and leave a network. 

  * PPTP is very easy to set up and is supported by most devices. It is, however, weakly encrypted in comparison to alternatives.

3. IPSec	
  * Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) encrypts data using the existing Internet Protocol (IP) framework.
  * IPSec is difficult to set up in comparison to alternatives; however, if successful, it boasts strong encryption and is also supported on many devices.

## LAN Networking Devices
**1. Router**
* It's job = connnect networks and pass data between them.
* Operates at layer3 of the OSI model.
* Often feature an interctive interface(such as a website or a console)that allows an administrator to configure various rules like router forwarding or firewalling.
* Useful when = devices are connected by multiple paths (will choose shortest and most reliable path with a faster medium --> Copper or Fibre)
* Routers are dedicated devices and do not performs the same function as switches.

**2. Switch**
* A dedicated networking device to connect multiple devices.( from 3 to 62 devices using Ethernet cables)
* Operates at both layer 2 and 3 of the OSI model. However, layer 2 switches cannot operate at layer 3.
* Layer 2 switches = Will forward just the frames onto the connected devices using their MAC address.
* Layer 3 switches = Can perform some of the responsibilities of a router. Like, they can send frames to devices (like layer 2 switches) but also can route packets to other devices using IP.
* **VLAN** : Allows specific devices within a neetwork to be virtually split up. This network separation provides security because it means that rules in place determine how specific devices communicate with each other.

 ![image](https://github.com/jaibirsingh/basics-of-networking/assets/20526556/daceb819-651e-437e-a73b-1f8924bf9051)


Example of the process:
HANDSHAKE: Starting TCP/IP Handshake between computer1 and computer3
HANDSHAKE: Sending SYN Packet from computer1 to computer3
ROUTING: computer1 says computer3 is not on my local network sending to gateway: router
ARP REQUEST: Who has router tell computer1
ARP RESPONSE: Hey computer1, I am router
ARP REQUEST: Who has computer3 tell router
ARP RESPONSE: Hey router, I am computer3
HANDSHAKE: computer3 received SYN Packet from computer1, sending SYN/ACK Packet to computer1
HANDSHAKE: computer1 received SYN/ACK Packet from computer3, sending ACK packet to computer3
HANDSHAKE: computer3 received ACK packet from computer1, Handshake Complete
TCP: Sending TCP packet from computer1 to computer3
TCP: computer3 received TCP Packet from computer1, sending ACK Packet to computer1
